Newsletters: add 108 (2020-07-29) (#442)
bitcoinops/bitcoinops.github.io: _posts/en/newsletters/2020-07-29-newsletter.md

[C-Lightning][c-lightning repo], [Eclair][eclair repo], [LND][lnd repo],
[Rust-Lightning][rust-lightning repo], [libsecp256k1][libsecp256k1 repo],
[Hardware Wallet Interface (HWI)][hwi], [Bitcoin Improvement Proposals
(BIPs)][bips repo], and [Lightning BOLTs][bolts repo].*

- [Bitcoin Core #19473][] net: Add -networkactive option
  FIXME:bitschmidty

- [Bitcoin Core #18044][] adds support for [BIP339][] witness txid
  (wtxid) transaction announcements and requests using the `inv` and
  `getdata` P2P protocol messages.  This eliminates a potential
  inefficiency related to duplicate announcements of segwit-spending
  transactions, making it cleaner to implement improvements such as
  segwit v1 transactions ([taproot][topic taproot]) and [package
  relay][topic package relay].  See our [extended summary][news104
  bip339] of BIP339 for details.

    After being merged into Bitcoin Core's master branch, this PR was
    [discussed][meeting xscript] during the weekly Bitcoin Core
    Development Meeting in relation to taproot activation.  It was noted
    that the version of taproot merged into Bitcoin Core (see PR
    [#17977][Bitcoin Core #17977]) will likely be based on wtxid relay.

>     This will make it more complicated to backport taproot to the

Reviewer: To summarise what I think the problem is:

- nodes that are unaware of segwit v1 (taproot) rules will reject taproot transactions that spend segwit v1 outputs since they're non-standard. See https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/b62fbf9e1c193464bca443076906b7ea47d56532/src/script/interpreter.cpp#L1552-L1554. (Note that we can send _to_ a segwit v1 address since https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/15846)
- if using txid relay, that node can't add the txid to the `recentRejects` filter, since the problem could just have been that the witness was mutated. See https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/0.20/src/net_processing.cpp#L2599-L2604 in v0.20.
- that means that taproot-aware nodes will announce taproot-spending transactions to their taproot-unaware peers, those peers will download and reject the transaction, but will then redownload the transaction (and rereject it) every time another peer announces it to them.
- with wtxid relay, this isn't a problem. The taproot-unaware node will store the wtxid in its recentRejects, and never try to  redownload it.
- therefore we should only announce taproot transactions using wtxids.

I'm not sure how difficult it actually is to backport wtxid relay. It seems to me that it shouldn't be too hard. v0.20 was only released a few weeks ago, and the wtxid PR was open long before that. I think we should check on how difficult it actually is before running with this.

Reviewer 2: Agree with @jnewbery that it's not /that/ hard to add wtxidrelay to 0.20 -- it's just not a matter of cherry-picking the patch from master; the code will need to be adapted and re-reviewed. For most backports it /is/ just a mater of cherry-picking a patch, so this would just be "hard" in comparison to that, in my opinion.

The "only announce taproot transactions using wtxids" is an additional change needed (that's not done yet, afaik) to actually avoid 0.20 and earlier nodes from spamming themselves by re-requesting taproot spends that they don't understand by txid from every peer.

The drawback of releasing taproot in a 0.20.x release but only for block consensus but not tx relay is that it would both reduce the ability to actually use taproot when it activated (if you can't spend a taproot tx via p2p and get it reliably to the miners, taproot's not really usable), and, if people did use taproot, would reduce the effectiveness of compact block relay (since nodes wouldn't already have the taproot spending transactions). All of which is to say this approach still means waiting for 0.21.y before taproot's usable, so doesn't really speed anything up compared to just releasing taproot in 0.21.y.

I think it would be super-useful to expand on the explanation in the newsletter a bit; there isn't any other canonical reference of how taproot/wtxid interacts anywhere else to point people to apart from the not very explicit description in the wtxid PR description, and having one would be helpful :)

    Bitcoin Core 0.21.x branch, whose major release is roughly
    [expected][Bitcoin Core #18947] in December 2020.  A proposed
    alternative for backporting taproot to the current 0.20.x branch,
    either so miner signaling can start sooner or just so it's easier
    for miners to upgrade, would be to only backport the logic for
    verifying taproot transactions in blocks and not the wtxid
    transaction relay logic.

- [Eclair #1485][] adds support for [spontaneous payments][topic
  spontaneous payments] using the same keysend protocol previously
  implemented by LND (see [Newsletter #30][news30 spont]) and
  C-Lightning (see Newsletters [#94][news94 keysend plugin] and
  [#107][news107 keysend rpc]).  This merged PR supports both receiving
  spontaneous payments (labeled as donations) and sending payments
  using the new `sendWithPreimage` method.

- [Eclair #1484][] adds low-level support for the changes to commitment
  transactions for [anchor outputs][topic anchor outputs].  Not yet
  added is higher-level support that will allow Eclair to negotiate
  the use of anchor outputs with peers, but this early step does pass

>   all [proposed test vectors][BOLTs #688].

Reviewer: Perhaps this should link directly to the comment: https://github.com/lightningnetwork/lightning-rfc/pull/688#issuecomment-656737250?

  RPC command and in the GUI since 0.14.0.

- [Bitcoin Core #18044][] adds support for [BIP339][] witness txid
  (wtxid) transaction announcements and requests using the `inv` and
  `getdata` P2P protocol messages.  This eliminates a potential
  inefficiency related to duplicate announcements of segwit-spending
  transactions, making it cleaner to implement improvements such as
  segwit v1 transactions ([taproot][topic taproot]) and [package
  relay][topic package relay].  See our [extended summary][news104
  bip339] of BIP339 for details.

    After being merged into Bitcoin Core's master branch, this PR was
    [discussed][meeting xscript] during the weekly Bitcoin Core
    Development Meeting in relation to taproot activation.  It was noted
    that the version of taproot merged into Bitcoin Core (see PR
    [#17977][Bitcoin Core #17977]) will likely be based on wtxid relay.
    This will make it more complicated to backport taproot to the
    current 0.20.x branch of Bitcoin Core and so possibly ensure that
    the earliest release of taproot activation logic will be in the
    Bitcoin Core 0.21.x branch, whose major release is roughly

>     [expected][Bitcoin Core #18947] in December 2020.  A proposed

Author: Agree.  Waiting to rewrite based on @jnewbery's comments until I see confirmation that John's summary is basically what AJ was thinking (John asked about it in the ##taproot-activation channel).

    either so miner signaling can start sooner or just so it's easier
    for miners to upgrade, would be to only backport the logic for
    verifying taproot transactions in blocks and not the wtxid
    transaction relay logic.

- [Eclair #1485][] adds support for [spontaneous payments][topic
  spontaneous payments] using the same keysend protocol previously
  implemented by LND (see [Newsletter #30][news30 spont]) and
  C-Lightning (see Newsletters [#94][news94 keysend plugin] and
  [#107][news107 keysend rpc]).  This merged PR supports both receiving
  spontaneous payments (labeled as donations) and sending payments
  using the new `sendWithPreimage` method.

- [Eclair #1484][] adds low-level support for the changes to commitment
  transactions for [anchor outputs][topic anchor outputs].  Not yet
  added is higher-level support that will allow Eclair to negotiate
  the use of anchor outputs with peers, but this early step does pass
  all [proposed test vectors][BOLTs #688].

- [LND #4455][] enables safe PSBT-based batched channel opens. Previously, each
  successful channel negotation in the batch would prematurely broadcast the

>   whole transaction with all channel funding outputs. This meant that it was
>   possible for subsequent channel negotiation failures to result in stuck funds.

Reviewer 3: nit: Slightly simpler
```suggestion
  whole transaction with all channel funding outputs. This meant
  subsequent channel negotiation failures could result in stuck funds.
```

---
title: 'Bitcoin Optech Newsletter #108'
permalink: /en/newsletters/2020/07/29/
name: 2020-07-29-newsletter
slug: 2020-07-29-newsletter
type: newsletter
layout: newsletter
lang: en
---
This week's newsletter describes a proposal to allow upgrading LN
channel commitment transaction formats without opening new channels and includes
a field report from River Financial about building wallet software using PSBTs
and descriptors. Also included are our regular sections with selected questions and
answers from the Bitcoin StackExchange, recent releases and release
candidates, and notable changes to popular Bitcoin infrastructure
projects.

## Action items

*None this week.*

## News

- **Upgrading channel commitment formats:** Olaoluwa Osuntokun
  [posted][osuntokun upgrade] to the Lightning-Dev mailing list this

>   week with a suggested extension to the LN specification that will

Reviewer 4: µ-nits in this paragraph:

- s/will/would/ allow  (there is also "Osuntokun’s proposal would allow" and "would port" in the same paragraph)

- "between them" seems unneeded

- maybe s/upgrade to new/change/ commitment formats

- s/on chain/on-chain/? ("put something on chain" seems awkward)

(started reviewing, but I'll be offline for half an hour, so posting this in case GH loses it)

    the channel terminates with a mutual close, the original funding
    transaction output is paid to the final channel balances; otherwise,
    the offchain secondary funding transaction can be published onchain
    and the channel can be resolved using the appropriate unilateral
    close protocol.

## Field report: Using Descriptors and PSBT at River

{% include articles/river-descriptors-psbt.md %}

## Selected Q&A from Bitcoin StackExchange

*[Bitcoin StackExchange][bitcoin.se] is one of the first places Optech
contributors look for answers to their questions---or when we have a
few spare moments to help curious or confused users.  In
this monthly feature, we highlight some of the top-voted questions and
answers posted since our last update.*

{% comment %}<!-- https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/search?tab=votes&q=created%3a1m..%20is%3aanswer -->{% endcomment %}
{% assign bse = "https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/a/" %}

- [What are "leaf versions" in Taproot?]({{bse}}97104)
  Michael Folkson and Pieter Wuille explain that each leaf node of a
  [taproot][topic taproot] tree has its own leaf version in addition to the

>   spending script. This leaf version can be used for upgradability and

Author: I think some Bitcoin writers have previously used the term "spending script" to mean the scriptSig, what me might call today the witness data.  The data included in the taproot leaves is much more akin to what those writers sometimes called the "locking script".  I think here we can just be a bit vague and simply call it "the script".  Maybe: "each leaf node of a taproot tree commits to both a leaf version and a script."

  designates the script semantics that apply just to that leaf.

> - [What are the different upgradability features in the BIP-Taproot (BIP 341) proposal?]({{bse}}96951)

Author: ```suggestion
- [What are the different upgradability features in the BIP-Taproot (BIP341) proposal?]({{bse}}96951)
```

>   Michael Folkson answers a question from twitter regarding the different ways

Author: ```suggestion
  Michael Folkson answers a question from Twitter regarding the different ways
```

  in which taproot can enable upgradability including leaf versions for script
  semantics, repurposing opcodes for future functionality, pubkey types, and the
  annex for new fields.

- [Is there an active list of BIPs currently open?]({{bse}}97043)
  Pieter Wuille describes various methods that have previously been used to

>   activate soft forks and notes that while there are currently no unactivated

Author: ```suggestion
  activate soft forks and notes that, while there are currently no unactivated
```

  spontaneous payments] using the same keysend protocol previously
  implemented by LND (see [Newsletter #30][news30 spont]) and
  C-Lightning (see Newsletters [#94][news94 keysend plugin] and
  [#107][news107 keysend rpc]).  This merged PR supports both receiving
  spontaneous payments (labeled as donations) and sending payments
  using the new `sendWithPreimage` method.

- [Eclair #1484][] adds low-level support for the changes to commitment
  transactions for [anchor outputs][topic anchor outputs].  Not yet
  added is higher-level support that will allow Eclair to negotiate
  the use of anchor outputs with peers, but this early step does pass
  all [proposed test vectors][BOLTs #688 eclair tests].

- [LND #4455][] enables safe PSBT-based batched channel opens. Previously, each
  successful channel negotation in the batch would prematurely broadcast the
  whole transaction with all channel funding outputs. This meant that it was
  possible for subsequent channel negotiation failures to result in stuck funds.
  This merged PR introduces a `--no_publish` flag to the `openchannel` command,
  which can be used to delay transaction broadcast until the very last channel

>   in the batch.

Author: ```suggestion
  in the batch has been created.
```

    close protocol.

## Field report: Using Descriptors and PSBT at River

{% include articles/river-descriptors-psbt.md %}

## Selected Q&A from Bitcoin StackExchange

*[Bitcoin StackExchange][bitcoin.se] is one of the first places Optech
contributors look for answers to their questions---or when we have a
few spare moments to help curious or confused users.  In
this monthly feature, we highlight some of the top-voted questions and
answers posted since our last update.*

{% comment %}<!-- https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/search?tab=votes&q=created%3a1m..%20is%3aanswer -->{% endcomment %}
{% assign bse = "https://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/a/" %}

- [What are "leaf versions" in Taproot?]({{bse}}97104)
  Michael Folkson and Pieter Wuille explain that each leaf node of a
  [taproot][topic taproot] tree commits to both a leaf version and a script.
  This leaf version can be used for upgradability and designates the script
  semantics that apply just to that leaf.

- [What are the different upgradability features in the BIP-Taproot (BIP341) proposal?]({{bse}}96951)
  Michael Folkson answers a question from Twitter regarding the different ways

>   in which taproot can enable upgradability including leaf versions for script

Reviewer 4: nit: a comma seems to be missing after "upgradability"

(fwiw it seems both versions are acceptable but I do prefer "upgradeability" with an "e", as otherwise it seems like "grad" would be pronounced like "graduate" or "Stalingrad" :-))

  semantics, repurposing opcodes for future functionality, pubkey types, and the
  annex for new fields.

- [Is there an active list of BIPs currently open?]({{bse}}97043)
  Pieter Wuille describes various methods that have previously been used to
  activate soft forks and notes that, while there are currently no unactivated
  soft forks in Bitcoin Core, there is a discussion about the activation method
  for taproot. Pieter also answers a [similar question][stack exchange miner
  signaling] about mining signaling support.

> - [Could we skip the Taproot soft fork and instead and use Simplicity to write the equivalent of Taproot scripts?]({{bse}}97049)

Reviewer 4: s/and instead and use/and instead use/

  Michael Folkson, quoting Pieter Wuille, outlines the current state of

>   [Simplicity][news96 simplicity] noting also that integrating Simplicity in

Reviewer 4: ISTM there is a missing comma before "noting", or alternatively s/noting also/and also notes/

projects.  Please consider upgrading to new releases or helping to test
release candidates.*

- [C-Lightning 0.9.0rc3][C-Lightning 0.9.0] is a release candidate for
  an upcoming major release.  It adds support for the updated `pay`
  command and new `keysend` RPC described in [last week's
  newsletter's][news107 notable] *notable code changes* section.  It also
  includes several other notable changes and multiple bug fixes.

- [Bitcoin Core 0.20.1rc1][Bitcoin Core 0.20.1] is a release candidate
  for an upcoming maintenance release.  In addition to bug fixes and
  some RPC behavior changes resulting from those fixes, the planned
  release provides compatibility with recent versions of [HWI][topic
  HWI] and its support for hardware wallet firmware released for the
  [fee overpayment attack][].

## Notable code and documentation changes

*Notable changes this week in [Bitcoin Core][bitcoin core repo],
[C-Lightning][c-lightning repo], [Eclair][eclair repo], [LND][lnd repo],
[Rust-Lightning][rust-lightning repo], [libsecp256k1][libsecp256k1 repo],
[Hardware Wallet Interface (HWI)][hwi], [Bitcoin Improvement Proposals
(BIPs)][bips repo], and [Lightning BOLTs][bolts repo].*

> - [Bitcoin Core #19473][] adds support for `networkactive` as both a command line

Reviewer 4: Suggest placing this PR after 18044 wtxid relay (which to me is the headlining change of the week's news, but I digress)

>   start-up and configuration file option. Setting this option enables or

Reviewer 4: nit: not sure "support for", "both" and "start-up" are needed; maybe just "add ... as a command line and configuration file option"

  disables all P2P network activity. After the node has been started, network
  activity can be toggled using the existing `setnetworkactive` RPC or the network
  activity button in the GUI.

- [Bitcoin Core #18044][] adds support for witness txid (wtxid)
  transaction inventory announcements (`inv`) and requests (`getdata`)
  as described in BIP339 (see [Newsletter #104][news104 bip339]).  Prior
  to this merge, all Bitcoin nodes announced new unconfirmed
  transactions to their peers by the transaction's txid.  However, txids
  don't commit to the witness data in segwit transactions, so a node who

>   downloaded an invalid or unwanted segwit transaction can't safely

Reviewer 4: s/who/that/

s/downloaded/downloads/ or s/can't/couldn't/

    nodes will advertise taproot spends to older taproot-unaware nodes.
    Each time one those taproot-unaware nodes receives a
    taproot-spending transaction, it will download it, realize it uses
    v1 segwit, and throw it away.  This could be very wasteful of
    network bandwidth, both for older taproot-unaware nodes and newer
    taproot-aware nodes.  This same problem applies to other proposed
    changes to network relay policy.

    The solution implemented in this merged PR is to announce
    transactions by their wtxid---which includes a commitment to the
    witness data for segwit transactions.  A taproot implementation in
    Bitcoin Core (see [PR #17977][Bitcoin Core #17977]) could then only
    relay transactions by their wtxid to prevent newer nodes from
    accidentally spamming older nodes.

    However, after this PR was merged into Bitcoin Core's master
    development branch, it was [discussed][meeting xscript] during the
    weekly Bitcoin Core Development Meeting whether taproot's soft
    dependency on wtxid relay will make it more complicated to backport
    taproot to the current 0.20.x branch of Bitcoin Core.  Four options

>     were mentioned during the meeting and in subsequent discussions:

Reviewer 4: The latest suhas/sipa irc discussion at http://www.erisian.com.au/bitcoin-core-dev/log-2020-07-28.html#l-511 and http://www.erisian.com.au/bitcoin-core-dev/log-2020-07-29.html#l-3 may be relevant here.

Author: These are good, but I think they basically resolve into "backporting wtxid is best", so I'm going to leave readers just the meeting link.

    1. **Backport wtxid:** both wtxid relay and taproot will be
       backported if there's a 0.20.x taproot release.  John Newbery has
       already created a quick [wtxid relay backport][].

    2. **Don't backport wtxid:** only backport taproot and just accept that
       transaction announcements will use more bandwidth than usual
       until everyone has upgraded to wtxid-using nodes.

    3. **Don't relay taproot:** only backport taproot but don't enable
       relaying of taproot transactions on backported nodes.  This
       prevents the immediate bandwidth waste but it may make it harder to
       get taproot-spending transactions to miners and will reduce the
       speed and efficiency of [BIP152][] compact blocks.  Worse compact
       block performance may temporarily increase the number of stale
       blocks that miners create (especially since the [public FIBRE
       network][] has recently shut down).

    4. **Don't backport anything:** don't backport wtxid relay or
       taproot---let taproot wait until after the release of Bitcoin
       Core 0.21, roughly [expected][Bitcoin Core #18947] in December
       2020.

>     No clear conclusion on which of these options to follow has been

Reviewer 4: Maybe: "At the time of this writing, no consensus was reached yet on which option to follow."

[Hardware Wallet Interface (HWI)][hwi], [Bitcoin Improvement Proposals
(BIPs)][bips repo], and [Lightning BOLTs][bolts repo].*

- [Bitcoin Core #19473][] adds suport for `networkactive` as both a command line
  start-up and configuration file option. Toggling this option enables or
  disables all P2P network activity. `setnetworkactive` has been available as an

>   RPC command and in the GUI since 0.14.0.

Author: For this final sentence, I suggest rewriting to describe what can be done via the RPC and GUI and then mentioning how, e.g.: "After the node has been started, network activity can be toggled using the existing `setnetworkactive` RPC or the network activity button in the GUI."

Reviewer 5: Thanks for this suggestion

  same bad transaction over and over from each peer announcing that
  transaction.

    So far this hasn't been an issue---honest peers usually don't
    announce transactions they wouldn't accept themselves, so only a
    disruptive peer that wanted to waste its own upload bandwidth would
    advertise invalid or unwanted transactions.  However, one type of
    unwanted transaction today are spends of v1 segwit UTXOs---the types
    of spends the [BIP341][] specification of [taproot][topic taproot]
    plans to use.  If taproot activates, this means newer taproot-aware
    nodes will advertise taproot spends to older taproot-unaware nodes.
    Each time one those taproot-unaware nodes receives a
    taproot-spending transaction, it will download it, realize it uses
    v1 segwit, and throw it away.  This could be very wasteful of
    network bandwidth, both for older taproot-unaware nodes and newer
    taproot-aware nodes.  This same problem applies to other proposed
    changes to network relay policy.

    The solution implemented in this merged PR is to announce
    transactions by their wtxid---which includes a commitment to the

>     witness data for segwit transactions.  It is expected that the

Reviewer: 'expected' is maybe a bit strong. When I asked Pieter about whether we'd only relay taproot using wtxid relay, he said that he hadn't really thought about it. Perhaps you could soften this to something like "A taproot implementation in Bitcoin Core could then only relay transactions by their wtxid ..."
